README.md, before:

# MySQL Diagnostics & Performance Toolkit

This README provides a well‑organized collection of MySQL diagnostic, auditing, and performance‑monitoring SQL queries. These scripts help identify slow queries, detect locking issues, analyze storage usage, validate data quality, and understand buffer pool efficiency.

---

## 📌 **1. Data Quality & Null Analysis**

### **Check null vs non‑null distribution in `appointments.subscription_id`**

```sql
select id,
       count(*) as total_rows,
       count(subscription_id) as non_null_count_for_subscriptions,
       (count(*) - count(subscription_id)) as null_count_for_subscriptions,
       round((count(*) - count(subscription_id)) * 100.0 / count(*), 2) as null_percentage_for_subscriptions
from appointments
group by id;
```

### **Validate email format for doctors**

```sql
select
    sum(case when email like '%@%.%' then 1 else 0 end) as valid_email_format,
    sum(case when email not like '%@%.%' then 1 else 0 end) as invalid_email_format,
    count(*) as total
from doctors;
```

### **Detect duplicate doctor IDs/emails**

```sql
select id, email, count(*) as duplicate_count
from doctors
group by id, email
having count(*) > 1;
```


### **Statistical Distribution Analysis**

```sql

with ordered as (
	select net_amount,
		NTILE(4) OVER (ORDER BY net_amount) AS quartile,
        NTILE(2) OVER (ORDER BY net_amount) AS median_group
		from transactions
),

stats as (
	select avg(net_amount) as avg_value, 
		stddev(net_amount) as std_dev_value, 
        min(net_amount) as min_Value, 
        max(net_amount) as max_value,
		count(*) as total_rows,
		count(distinct net_amount) as distinct_values,

        AVG(CASE WHEN median_group = 1 THEN net_amount END) AS median,

        -- Q1 and Q3 (approx)
        AVG(CASE WHEN quartile = 1 THEN net_amount END) AS q1,
        AVG(CASE WHEN quartile = 3 THEN net_amount END) AS q3

		from ordered
)

select *, (max_value - min_value) as range_values, std_dev_value/avg_value as coefficient_of_variation,
    (q3 - q1) as iqr,
    (avg_value - 3*std_dev_value) as lower_3sigma,
    (avg_value + 3*std_dev_value) as upper_3sigma

from stats;
```
| avg_value  | std_dev_value      | min_Value | max_value | total_rows | distinct_values | median    | q1        | q3        | range_values | coefficient_of_variation | iqr       | lower_3sigma          | upper_3sigma          |
|------------|-------------------|-----------|-----------|------------|-----------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|--------------|--------------------------|-----------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| 27.739583  | 65.20101047141107 | 0.00      | 300.00    | 96         | 7               | 0.708333  | 0.000000  | 22.500000 | 300.00       | 2.3504682990876637       | 87.041667 | -167.8634484142332    | 223.34261441423322    |
---

## 📌 **2. Process Monitoring & Active Queries**

### **Show current MySQL process list**

```sql
show full processlist;
```

### **Filter non‑sleeping sessions ordered by time**

```sql
select *
from information_schema.processlist
where command != 'Sleep'
order by time desc;
```

---

## 📌 **3. Performance Schema Insight**

### **Top queries related to notifications**

```sql
select digest_text, count_star
from performance_schema.events_statements_summary_by_digest
where digest_text like '%notification%'
order by sum_timer_wait desc
limit 10;
```

### **High row‑examining queries**

```sql
select digest_text, sum_rows_examined, sum_rows_sent
from performance_schema.events_statements_summary_by_digest
where sum_rows_examined > 100000
order by sum_rows_examined desc
limit 10;
```

---

## 📌 **4. Slow Query & Runtime Diagnostics**

### **Top 10 slowest queries**

```sql
select
    left(digest_text, 100) as query_preview,
    count_star as runs,
    round(sum_timer_wait/1000000000000,2) as total_sec,
    round(avg_timer_wait/1000000000,2) as avg_ms,
    sum_rows_examined as rows_read,
    sum_rows_sent as rows_returned
from performance_schema.events_statements_summary_by_digest
where digest_text is not null
order by sum_timer_wait desc
limit 10;
```

### **Running queries longer than 5 seconds**

```sql
select id, user, host, db, command, time, state, left(info, 100) as query
from information_schema.processlist
where time > 5 and command != 'Sleep'
order by time desc;
```

---

## 📌 **5. Database Size & Index Analysis**

### **Database size & table count**

```sql
select table_schema as db,
       round(sum(data_length + index_length)/1024/1024, 2) as size_mb,
       count(*) as table_count
from information_schema.tables
group by table_schema
order by size_mb desc;
```

### **Unused and redundant indexes**

```sql
select * from sys.schema_unused_indexes;
select * from sys.schema_redundant_indexes;
```

---

## 📌 **6. Detailed Appointment & Patient Lookup**

### **Active recent patients with appointment data**

```sql
select p.id, p.email, p.first_name,
       a.id as appointment_id, a.total_price, a.status as appointment_status,
       s.start_time, sc.day_of_week
from patients p
inner join appointments a on p.id = a.patient_id and a.status in ('Pending','Scheduled','Completed')
inner join slots s on a.slot_id = s.id
inner join schedules sc on s.schedule_id = sc.id
where p.created_at > '2024-01-01'
  and p.is_active = true
  and p.id > 0
order by p.id asc
limit 50;
```

---

## 📌 **7. Global System Status Checks**

### **InnoDB & connection metrics**

```sql
show global status like 'Innodb_row_lock%';
show global status like 'Threads_connected';
show global status like 'Aborted_connects%';
```

---

## 📌 **8. Comprehensive Health Check Block**

### **Single query for system performance overview**

```sql
select
    (select count(*) from information_schema.processlist) as active_connections,
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Threads_connected') as current_connections,

    (select round(sum(data_length + index_length)/1024/1024, 2)
        from information_schema.tables where table_schema = database()) as db_size_mb,

    (select count(*) from mysql.slow_log where start_time > now() - interval 1 hour) as slow_query_last_hour,

    (select count(*) from performance_schema.data_locks) as current_locks,
    (select count(*) from performance_schema.data_lock_waits) as all_blocked_transaction,

    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_read_requests') as buffer_read_requests,
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_reads') as buffer_disk_reads;
```

---

## 📌 **9. Deadlock Audit**

```sql
select 'Deadlock Information' as info,
       variable_value as deadlocks_since_start
from performance_schema.global_status
where variable_name = 'innodb_deadlocks';
```

---

## 📌 **10. Buffer Pool Efficiency Calculation**

```sql
select
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_read_requests') as read_requests,
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_reads') as disk_reads,
    round(
        (1 - (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_reads') /
             (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_read_requests')
        ) * 100, 2
    ) as hit_rate_percent;
```

---

## ✅ Summary

This README consolidates essential SQL scripts to:

* Diagnose performance bottlenecks
* Monitor MySQL engine status
* Detect data integrity issues
* Analyze index efficiency
* Audit slow queries & locking
* Evaluate buffer pool performance

You can directly copy/paste any block into your MySQL client or automation scripts.

If you'd like, I can also generate:

* A version with explanations for each query
* A shorter “quick reference” version
* A shell script that runs all diagnostics automatically

Commit message:

Modify SQL query for appointment subscription analysis
Updated SQL query to group by appointment_date and included additional columns for null and non-null counts.

README.md, after:

# MySQL Diagnostics & Performance Toolkit

This README provides a well‑organized collection of MySQL diagnostic, auditing, and performance‑monitoring SQL queries. These scripts help identify slow queries, detect locking issues, analyze storage usage, validate data quality, and understand buffer pool efficiency.

---

## 📌 **1. Data Quality & Null Analysis**

### **Check null vs non‑null distribution in `appointments.subscription_id`**

```sql
SELECT
		appointment_date,
       count(*) as total_rows,
       count(subscription_id) as non_null_count_for_subscriptions,
       (count(*) - count(subscription_id)) as null_count_for_subscriptions,
       round((count(*) - count(subscription_id)) * 100.0 / count(*), 2) as null_percentage_for_subscriptions
from appointments
group by appointment_date;

| appointment_date | total_rows | non_null_count_for_subscriptions | null_count_for_subscriptions | null_percentage_for_subscriptions |
|------------------|------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| 2025-09-14       | 1          | 0                                | 1                           | 100.00                            |
| 2025-09-15       | 3          | 0                                | 3                           | 100.00                            |
| 2025-09-21       | 1          | 0                                | 1                           | 100.00                            |
| 2025-09-22       | 1          | 0                                | 1                           | 100.00                            |
| 2025-10-05       | 2          | 0                                | 2                           | 100.00                            |
| 2025-10-07       | 1          | 0                                | 1                           | 100.00                            |
| 2025-10-12       | 3          | 0                                | 3                           | 100.00                            |
| 2025-10-13       | 1          | 0                                | 1                           | 100.00                            |

```

### **Validate email format for doctors**

```sql
select
    sum(case when email like '%@%.%' then 1 else 0 end) as valid_email_format,
    sum(case when email not like '%@%.%' then 1 else 0 end) as invalid_email_format,
    count(*) as total
from doctors;
```

### **Detect duplicate doctor IDs/emails**

```sql
select id, email, count(*) as duplicate_count
from doctors
group by id, email
having count(*) > 1;
```


### **Statistical Distribution Analysis**

```sql

with ordered as (
	select net_amount,
		NTILE(4) OVER (ORDER BY net_amount) AS quartile,
        NTILE(2) OVER (ORDER BY net_amount) AS median_group
		from transactions
),

stats as (
	select avg(net_amount) as avg_value, 
		stddev(net_amount) as std_dev_value, 
        min(net_amount) as min_Value, 
        max(net_amount) as max_value,
		count(*) as total_rows,
		count(distinct net_amount) as distinct_values,

        AVG(CASE WHEN median_group = 1 THEN net_amount END) AS median,

        -- Q1 and Q3 (approx)
        AVG(CASE WHEN quartile = 1 THEN net_amount END) AS q1,
        AVG(CASE WHEN quartile = 3 THEN net_amount END) AS q3

		from ordered
)

select *, (max_value - min_value) as range_values, std_dev_value/avg_value as coefficient_of_variation,
    (q3 - q1) as iqr,
    (avg_value - 3*std_dev_value) as lower_3sigma,
    (avg_value + 3*std_dev_value) as upper_3sigma

from stats;
```
| avg_value  | std_dev_value      | min_Value | max_value | total_rows | distinct_values | median    | q1        | q3        | range_values | coefficient_of_variation | iqr       | lower_3sigma          | upper_3sigma          |
|------------|-------------------|-----------|-----------|------------|-----------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|--------------|--------------------------|-----------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| 27.739583  | 65.20101047141107 | 0.00      | 300.00    | 96         | 7               | 0.708333  | 0.000000  | 22.500000 | 300.00       | 2.3504682990876637       | 87.041667 | -167.8634484142332    | 223.34261441423322    |
---

## 📌 **2. Process Monitoring & Active Queries**

### **Show current MySQL process list**

```sql
show full processlist;
```

### **Filter non‑sleeping sessions ordered by time**

```sql
select *
from information_schema.processlist
where command != 'Sleep'
order by time desc;
```

---

## 📌 **3. Performance Schema Insight**

### **Top queries related to notifications**

```sql
select digest_text, count_star
from performance_schema.events_statements_summary_by_digest
where digest_text like '%notification%'
order by sum_timer_wait desc
limit 10;
```

### **High row‑examining queries**

```sql
select digest_text, sum_rows_examined, sum_rows_sent
from performance_schema.events_statements_summary_by_digest
where sum_rows_examined > 100000
order by sum_rows_examined desc
limit 10;
```

---

## 📌 **4. Slow Query & Runtime Diagnostics**

### **Top 10 slowest queries**

```sql
select
    left(digest_text, 100) as query_preview,
    count_star as runs,
    round(sum_timer_wait/1000000000000,2) as total_sec,
    round(avg_timer_wait/1000000000,2) as avg_ms,
    sum_rows_examined as rows_read,
    sum_rows_sent as rows_returned
from performance_schema.events_statements_summary_by_digest
where digest_text is not null
order by sum_timer_wait desc
limit 10;
```

### **Running queries longer than 5 seconds**

```sql
select id, user, host, db, command, time, state, left(info, 100) as query
from information_schema.processlist
where time > 5 and command != 'Sleep'
order by time desc;
```

---

## 📌 **5. Database Size & Index Analysis**

### **Database size & table count**

```sql
select table_schema as db,
       round(sum(data_length + index_length)/1024/1024, 2) as size_mb,
       count(*) as table_count
from information_schema.tables
group by table_schema
order by size_mb desc;
```

### **Unused and redundant indexes**

```sql
select * from sys.schema_unused_indexes;
select * from sys.schema_redundant_indexes;
```

---

## 📌 **6. Detailed Appointment & Patient Lookup**

### **Active recent patients with appointment data**

```sql
select p.id, p.email, p.first_name,
       a.id as appointment_id, a.total_price, a.status as appointment_status,
       s.start_time, sc.day_of_week
from patients p
inner join appointments a on p.id = a.patient_id and a.status in ('Pending','Scheduled','Completed')
inner join slots s on a.slot_id = s.id
inner join schedules sc on s.schedule_id = sc.id
where p.created_at > '2024-01-01'
  and p.is_active = true
  and p.id > 0
order by p.id asc
limit 50;
```

---

## 📌 **7. Global System Status Checks**

### **InnoDB & connection metrics**

```sql
show global status like 'Innodb_row_lock%';
show global status like 'Threads_connected';
show global status like 'Aborted_connects%';
```

---

## 📌 **8. Comprehensive Health Check Block**

### **Single query for system performance overview**

```sql
select
    (select count(*) from information_schema.processlist) as active_connections,
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Threads_connected') as current_connections,

    (select round(sum(data_length + index_length)/1024/1024, 2)
        from information_schema.tables where table_schema = database()) as db_size_mb,

    (select count(*) from mysql.slow_log where start_time > now() - interval 1 hour) as slow_query_last_hour,

    (select count(*) from performance_schema.data_locks) as current_locks,
    (select count(*) from performance_schema.data_lock_waits) as all_blocked_transaction,

    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_read_requests') as buffer_read_requests,
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_reads') as buffer_disk_reads;
```

---

## 📌 **9. Deadlock Audit**

```sql
select 'Deadlock Information' as info,
       variable_value as deadlocks_since_start
from performance_schema.global_status
where variable_name = 'innodb_deadlocks';
```

---

## 📌 **10. Buffer Pool Efficiency Calculation**

```sql
select
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_read_requests') as read_requests,
    (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_reads') as disk_reads,
    round(
        (1 - (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_reads') /
             (select variable_value from performance_schema.global_status where variable_name = 'Innodb_buffer_pool_read_requests')
        ) * 100, 2
    ) as hit_rate_percent;
```

---

## ✅ Summary

This README consolidates essential SQL scripts to:

* Diagnose performance bottlenecks
* Monitor MySQL engine status
* Detect data integrity issues
* Analyze index efficiency
* Audit slow queries & locking
* Evaluate buffer pool performance

You can directly copy/paste any block into your MySQL client or automation scripts.

If you'd like, I can also generate:

* A version with explanations for each query
* A shorter “quick reference” version
* A shell script that runs all diagnostics automatically
